---
date: "2022-08-15"
categories: ["git", "tooling", "project-ideas"]
title: We should be using git notes
description: Tooling around git notes would be better than tooling around commit messages.
---
# We should be using git notes (a lot)

[`git notes`] is an occassionally discussed git feature you may have heard of in the contexts of [changelog maintainence] or CI metadata tracking.
Notes are a simple mechanism for adding arbitrary metadata to a git object such as a commit or file version.
As the docs say, "a typical use of notes is to supplement a commit message without changing the commit itself:"
```bash
git notes append -m 'leaving hard stuff for later'
git notes --ref=release_testing add HEAD@{5} -m "tested on $(date) by $(users)"
```

Notes are not frequently used, either by end users or tooling.
If you add a note to your commit, you will see it in your `git log`,
but not in your [VSCode GitLens formatting options], or much other tooling.
Most tools are fairly commit message centric.

This is really too bad, because notes are a rich mechanism for in-repo communication.
Notes are:

**1. Editable post-commit**  
We usually have to choose between doing pre-merge [history surgery] and having useless commit messages.
With notes, this is a non-issue.

**2. Namespaced**  
The default notes namespace is `refs/notes/commits`, but this can be changed with `notes --ref=changelog`.
This means one can have different namespaces for changelogs, implementation notes, etc.

**3. Granular**  
A note can be attached to any object, not just commits.
So, instead of rebasing to split apart unrelated files in a commit,
one could just add a note to each file version object.

**4. Flexible and extensible**  
Notes can be images or other binary formats.
For example, a custom note format could be used to add implementation comments on a per-line basis,
without cluttering the actual codebase.

With such a powerful tool on-hand, it is a shame that we're still stuck in discussions like
"do we mangle history or have bad commit messages,"
and "is this comment about implementation _really_ worth adding when it might get outdated?"

### A first step

Of these features, I think the biggest bang for the buck would be the ability to "virtually" squash commits in the log.
A barebones implementation would consist of a wrappers around `log` and `blame` for prioritizing and combining notes in the output,
as well as maybe some convenience helper functions for creating them, and a way to backfill notes from PR content.

[`git notes`]: https://git-scm.com/docs/git-notes
[changelog maintainence]: https://dev.to/leehambley/effortlessly-maintain-a-high-quality-change-log-with-git-notes-4bm5
[history surgery]: https://about.gitlab.com/blog/2018/06/07/keeping-git-commit-history-clean/
[VSCode GitLens formatting options]: https://github.com/gitkraken/vscode-gitlens/wiki/Custom-Formatting#commit-tokens
